---
title: "Trio Dances"
tags: ["ensemble"]
sectionSortOrder: 8
shortDesc: "A lively set of three dance movements for string trio"
forces: "for violin, viola and cello "
length: "14 mins"
workNumber: AS0035
compositionYear: "2021"
pdf: "Trio Dances"
audio: "AS0035"
---

<b>Programme note</b>

This is a little suite of three dances for string trio that, in a sense, picks up from where my violin/viola Spring Masque left off.

1.Galliard

Ever since writing the score for the National Theatre’s production of The Revenger’s Tragedy in 2008, I had fallen in love with a certain kind of Renaissance-inspired sound which infuses the first of these dances. The opening characteristic stress pattern of the 6/8 Galliard metre is used as a platform throughout the movement to explore the thematic material in a series of increasingly frequent modulations.

2. Sarabande

This is based on a simple tune that I wrote many years ago and until now, never found a home for. I like how composition frequently works like that.. they get tucked away in a drawer, waiting for their right moment. Each of the three instruments gets a turn with the melodic material.

3. Rigaudon

An earthy, robust dance in 2/4 time to round the suite off.. though containing some contrapuntal passage work to give the players a workout!

<hr class="h-px border-t-0 bg-transparent bg-gradient-to-r from-transparent via-white to-transparent opacity-60" />

<i>"Adrian Sutton’s Trio Dances, as performed by Emma (violin), Sofia (viola) and Lydia (cello), proved to be a more than welcome British guest at this French feast. Modelled on Renaissance dances, which Sutton plainly loves, they instantly caught the ear: a lovely, sometimes boisterous Galliard, very English, with some touches that brought Tippett to mind; a Sarabande whose sensitive tapestry of sound made me think of Finzi, with a lovely cello solo against gentle rocking in the violin and viola; and a bouncy Rigaudon, the theme tossed between the instruments, with a little astringency thrown in. It was a tour de force, and the audience (including me) loved it."</i> - Chris Kettle, Seen and Heard International

<hr class="h-px border-t-0 bg-transparent bg-gradient-to-r from-transparent via-white to-transparent opacity-60" />

extract perf. Emma Roijackers (violin), Sofia Silva Sousa (viola) and Lydia Hillerudh (cello)
