---
title: "Spring Masque"
tags: ["soloduo"]
sectionSortOrder: 8
shortDesc: "A duet for violin and viola, bursting with energy and joy"
forces: "for violin and viola"
length: "5 mins"
workNumber: "AS0014"
compositionYear: "2011"
audioIndex: 0
projectColour: 00AA00
audio: "AS0014 Spring Masque (Fenella Humpreys, Andrew Berridge) - extract-01"
pdf: "Spring Masque"
bannerImage: "./image/banner.jpg"
titleImage: "./image/tile.jpg"
recording: "https://music.apple.com/us/album/spring-masque/1587222895?i=1587224225"
buyPDF: "https://payhip.com/b/VsefT"
hire: false
---

Spring Masque celebrates the joyous energy of a violin and a viola in duet. Limiting one's resources like this presents an invigorating challenge: to squeeze a complete musical environment out of two instruments.. rhythm, harmony, melody, invigorating figurations.. all in a way that is (hopefully) both engaging to listen to, and play.

Composers - including myself - frequently pre-meditate how a piece is going to work, and plan it out in meticulous detail before writing any actual notes. Spring Masque was different; it was written bar-to-bar, in a process of organic development and with no preconception, and was written with the instruments in my hands, alongside a laptop and microphone. I swapped between violin and viola, recording short phrases and figurations to see how they worked together, gradually extending the piece as I worked. Once I was happy with the result, I notated the whole thing on paper. Of course, recording and correcting at leisure is one thing - playing it in real-time performance without the opportunity to stop is quite another. The amazing players you're now hearing are simply genius.

<i>- Adrian Sutton</i>

<i>"utterly joyous; a dazzlingly infectious jig scored for only violin and viola, but it feels like a lot more" - Simon Thompson, MusicWeb</i>

<hr class="h-px border-t-0 bg-transparent bg-gradient-to-r from-transparent via-white to-transparent opacity-60" />

extract perf. Fenella Humphreys (violin) and Andrew Berridge (viola)
